---
title: Which Datetime Data Type?
date: 2016-02-06 15:08:02
tags:  
	- SQL Server
	- Data Types
	- DateTime
	- Best Practices
---

When I took over a database recently (ok almost 2 years ago now), one of the first things I noticed was that the previous "developers" made heavy use of datetime2:

{% codeblock %}
declare @salesTime datetime2(7)
{% endcodeblock %}

Just to be clear, this is data for a point-of sale system and the date is being stored with a precision of 7(!) digits of precision per second.  The 10th of a microsecond. That's 2007/02/07 16:01:23.1234567!  Or as I like to joke that we know the microsecond Jesus made his purchase!

Beginning in SQL Server 2008, Microsoft added a new datetime data type of datetime2.  At the time most of my experience had been with SQL Server 2000 and 2005 and the only options for storing a datetime in SQL Server were datetime and smalldatetime which had fixed precision and storage values.  This meant that if your application needed dates far into the future or precision beyond a minute, you had no choice but to double your storage size. 

A brief look at each data type:

|Type | Range | Precision | Storage (bytes)	| Fixed size? |
| - | - | - | - | - |
|smalldatetime | 1900-01-01 to 2079-06-06 | 1 minute | 4 | Yes |
|datetime | 1753-01-01 to 9999-12-31 | .00333 seconds |	8 |	Yes |
|datetime2(*n*) | 0001-01-01 to 9999-12-31 23:59.59.9999999 | 100 ns | 6-8 | No |
|date |	0001-01-01 to 9999-12-31 | 1 day | 3 | Yes |
|time(*n*) |	00:00:00.0000000 to 23:59.59.9999999 | 100 ns |	3-5	| No |

Current SQL Server 2008/2012/2014 recommendations are to use datetime2, date, and time types for you schema and use the lowest precision possible.  For the point-of-sale application mentioned above, I can easily settle for knowing to the second when an event took place.  With storage being so cheap, the difference between a couple of bytes might not make a lot of sense but the difference in those bytes over thousands or millions of rows and their impact on performance tuning.  If you only need to store the date, then just use the date data type which will store the date without the time and can greatly simply searches where the time of day isn't important.

Datetime is now deprecated but don't go too far with the precision of datetime2 unless needed. Up to 2 bytes of saving per column may seem minimal but small savings add up as applications grow in scale and what's the point of storing data that you don't need and will never use. 


